
# Unified Auditing in Oracle 19c

This guide provides a step-by-step approach to setting up a SQL*Plus environment in PowerShell, switching to the pluggable database (if necessary), and creating two users, Jack and Jill, with specific auditing roles in an Oracle 19c database.

## Setting up SQL*Plus Environment in PowerShell

To run SQL*Plus commands from PowerShell, you need to first set up the environment. This involves setting the Oracle environment variables and then launching SQL*Plus.

```powershell
# Launch SQL*Plus
sqlplus / as sysdba
```

## Switching to the Pluggable Database (if required)

If you need to work with a pluggable database (PDB), you can switch to it using the following SQL*Plus command:

```sql
-- Connect to the root container
CONNECT / AS SYSDBA

-- Switch to the PDB named orclpdb
ALTER SESSION SET CONTAINER = orclpdb;
```

## Creating Users Jack and Jill

As a user with the DBA role, execute the following commands in SQL*Plus to create users Jack and Jill.

### Creating User Jack

Jack will be a Unified Auditing admin.

```sql
-- Create user Jack with the auditing admin privileges
CREATE USER jack IDENTIFIED BY password;
GRANT CREATE SESSION TO jack;
GRANT UNIFIED_AUDIT_SYSTEM TO jack;
```

Replace `password` with a strong password of your choosing.

### Creating User Jill

Jill will be an auditor without admin capabilities.

```sql
-- Create user Jill with the necessary privileges to view audit data
CREATE USER jill IDENTIFIED BY password;
GRANT CREATE SESSION TO jill;
GRANT SELECT ON SYS.UNIFIED_AUDIT_TRAIL TO jill;
```

Again, replace `password` with a strong password of your choosing.

## Conclusion

You now have a SQL*Plus environment set up in PowerShell and have created two users with specific roles related to Unified Auditing in Oracle 19c.

## Activity for Jack: Creating Objects

Jack has administrative privileges which allow him to create objects in the database. Let's log in as Jack and create a new table.

```sql
-- Connect as Jack
CONNECT jack IDENTIFIED BY [jack_password]@localhost:1521/orclpdb;

-- Create a new table called 'audit_log'
CREATE TABLE audit_log (
  log_id NUMBER GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY,
  action VARCHAR2(100),
  timestamp DATE DEFAULT SYSDATE
);
```

Make sure to replace `[jack_password]` with the actual password that was set for Jack.

## Granting Privileges to Jill

After creating the table, Jack needs to grant Jill the SELECT privilege so she can view the contents of the table.

```sql
-- Grant SELECT privilege on 'audit_log' to Jill
GRANT SELECT ON audit_log TO jill;
```

## Activity for Jill: Querying Jack's Table

Jill has the privilege to view audit logs. She will attempt to query the table created by Jack.

```sql
-- Connect as Jill
CONNECT jill IDENTIFIED BY [jill_password]@localhost:1521/orclpdb;

-- Select from 'audit_log' table
SELECT * FROM jack.audit_log;
```

Jill should be able to see the contents of the `audit_log` table. Make sure to replace `[jill_password]` with the actual password that was set for Jill.

## Activity for Jill: Attempting to Create Objects

Jill will now attempt to create a table, which should fail due to her limited privileges.

```sql
-- Attempt to create a table
CREATE TABLE jill.test_table (
  test_id NUMBER,
  description VARCHAR2(100)
);
```

This should result in an error, as Jill does not have the CREATE TABLE privilege.


Since Mixed Mode is enabled by default in Oracle 19c, there is no need to perform additional steps to enable it. However, let's verify that it's enabled.

```sql
-- Verify if Mixed Mode is enabled
SELECT VALUE FROM V$OPTION WHERE PARAMETER = 'Unified Auditing';
```

You should see `TRUE` as the value, indicating that Unified Auditing in Mixed Mode is enabled.


## Monitoring and Documenting Behavior

It's important to regularly monitor the audit trail and document any findings or unusual behavior. This can help in compliance and security investigations.

## Thinking Up Other Policies

Consider what other operations or database schemas might require auditing. Think about creating policies for UPDATE or DELETE operations, or for sensitive tables in other schemas.

For assistance with creating audit policies, refer to the Oracle documentation on Unified Auditing:

[Oracle Unified Auditing Documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/19/dbseg/introduction-to-auditing.html#GUID-ADA1F6DF-6C64-4BD6-B1B6-8B02BEF0A6FA)


# Privilege Analysis Lab Using Oracle 19c

This lab guides you through the process of performing privilege analysis in an Oracle 19c database using the sample users Jack and Jill. Privilege analysis helps you identify which privileges are being used and which are not, allowing you to enforce the principle of least privilege.

## Prerequisites

Before you start with privilege analysis, ensure that the following prerequisites are met:

- Unified Auditing is enabled (as covered in the previous lab).
- Users Jack and Jill have been created.
- Jack is granted the `CAPTURE_ADMIN` role to manage privilege captures.
- Jill has been granted access to view the audit data.

## Granting CAPTURE_ADMIN Role to Jack

Log in to SQL*Plus as a user with DBA privileges and grant Jack the `CAPTURE_ADMIN` role.

```sql
-- Grant CAPTURE_ADMIN role to Jack
GRANT CAPTURE_ADMIN TO jack;
```

## Starting Privilege Analysis

As user Jack, you will create a privilege analysis policy to determine which privileges are used by the user Jill when accessing the `HR.EMPLOYEES` table.

```sql
-- Connect as Jack
CONNECT jack@orclpdb

-- Create a privilege analysis policy
BEGIN
  DBMS_PRIVILEGE_CAPTURE.CREATE_CAPTURE (
    name           => 'emp_table_priv_analysis',
    description    => 'Privilege analysis for HR.EMPLOYEES table',
    type           => DBMS_PRIVILEGE_CAPTURE.G_DATABASE,
    condition      => 'USER=''JILL'' AND OBJECT_SCHEMA=''HR'' AND OBJECT_NAME=''EMPLOYEES'''
  );
END;
/
```

## Enabling the Privilege Analysis Policy

Enable the privilege analysis policy to start capturing privilege usage data.

```sql
-- Enable the privilege analysis policy
EXEC DBMS_PRIVILEGE_CAPTURE.ENABLE_CAPTURE ('emp_table_priv_analysis');
```

## Performing Operations as Jill

Log in as Jill and perform some operations on the `HR.EMPLOYEES` table.

```sql
-- Connect as Jill
CONNECT jill@orclpdb

-- Perform operations
SELECT * FROM HR.EMPLOYEES;
UPDATE HR.EMPLOYEES SET EMAIL = EMAIL WHERE EMPLOYEE_ID = 100;
```

## Generating Privilege Analysis Results

Switch back to user Jack to generate the analysis report.

```sql
-- Connect as Jack
CONNECT jack@orclpdb

-- Generate the results
EXEC DBMS_PRIVILEGE_CAPTURE.GENERATE_RESULT ('emp_table_priv_analysis');
```

## Viewing the Privilege Analysis Results

Query the DBA_USED_PRIVS view to see which privileges Jill has used.

```sql
-- View the used privileges
SELECT * FROM DBA_USED_PRIVS WHERE CAPTURE_NAME = 'emp_table_priv_analysis';
```

## Identifying Unused Privileges

Query the DBA_UNUSED_PRIVS view to identify any privileges that were not used by Jill.

```sql
-- View the unused privileges
SELECT * FROM DBA_UNUSED_PRIVS WHERE CAPTURE_NAME = 'emp_table_priv_analysis';
```

## Conclusion

This analysis helps you understand which privileges are necessary for Jill's activities. Based on this data, you can revoke unnecessary privileges to adhere to the principle of least privilege.

## Lab Exercise

Ask the students to repeat the privilege analysis for other schemas and tables. They should identify unused privileges and write a report on their findings.

For more information on privilege analysis, refer to the Oracle documentation:

[Oracle Database Privilege Analysis](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/19/dbseg/database-privilege-analysis.html)


# Lab Activity: Demonstrating Privilege Differences Between Users

This lab activity is designed to demonstrate the difference in privileges between the users Jack and Jill that were created in the previous labs. Jack, being a Unified Auditing admin, will create a database object, and Jill, as an auditor, will use it but will not have the privileges to create one.

## Activity for Jack: Creating a Table

First, let's have Jack create a table in his schema.

```sql
-- Connect as Jack
CONNECT jack@localhost:1521/orclpdb

-- Create a table
CREATE TABLE jack.my_table (id NUMBER, name VARCHAR2(50));
```

This table is owned by Jack, and he should be able to create it without any issues.

## Activity for Jill: Selecting from Jack's Table

Now, let's switch to Jill and try to perform a SELECT operation on the table created by Jack.

```sql
-- Connect as Jill
CONNECT jill@localhost:1521/orclpdb

-- Attempt to select from Jack's table
SELECT * FROM jack.my_table;
```

Jill should be able to perform the SELECT operation if Jack grants her the necessary SELECT privilege on his table. If not yet granted, you'll need to log in as Jack and run:

```sql
-- Connect as Jack
CONNECT jack@localhost:1521/orclpdb

-- Grant SELECT privilege to Jill
GRANT SELECT ON my_table TO jill;
```

## Activity for Jill: Attempting to Create a Table

Finally, let's see what happens when Jill tries to create her own table, which she should not be allowed to do with her current privileges.

```sql
-- Connect as Jill
CONNECT jill@localhost:1521/orclpdb

-- Attempt to create a table
CREATE TABLE jill.my_table (id NUMBER, name VARCHAR2(50));
```

Jill should receive an error indicating that she does not have the necessary privileges to create a table.

## Conclusion

This activity should help illustrate the differences in privileges between Jack and Jill. Jack, as an admin, can create objects in the database, while Jill, as an auditor, can only view objects she has been granted access to and cannot create her own objects.

## Reflective Questions

- What error did Jill encounter when she tried to create a table?
- Why is it important for Jill to have limited privileges?
- How might you manage privileges for users like Jill in a production environment?

